
==== Editor ====[mom-script-editor]

- ``Editor.active_document()``: returns current active document or null
if there are no open documents
- ``Editor.set_active_document(doc)``: makes ``doc`` active
- ``Editor.active_window()``: returns current active window
- ``Editor.set_active_window(window)``: makes ``window`` active
- ``Editor.active_view()``: returns current active document view
- ``Editor.set_active_view(view)``: makes ``view`` active
- ``Editor.documents()``: returns list of all open documents
- ``Editor.documents()``: returns list of all open document views
- ``Editor.documents()``: returns list of all document windows
- ``Editor.get_document_by_path(path)``: returns document with path
``path`` or null.
- ``Editor.get_document_by_uri(path)``: returns document with uri
``uri`` or null.
- ``Editor.new_file(file, encoding=null, window=null)``: open file if it exists
on disk or create a new one. If ``encoding`` is null or "auto" then pick character
encoding automatically, otherwise use ``encoding``. If ``window`` is given then
open file in that window, otherwise in an existing window.
- ``Editor.open_files(files, window=null)``: open files. If ``window`` is
given then open files in that window, otherwise in an existing window.
- ``Editor.open_files(uris, window=null)``: open files. If ``window`` is
given then open files in that window, otherwise in an existing window.
- ``Editor.open_file(file, encoding=null, window=null)``: open file.
If ``encoding`` is null or "auto" then pick character encoding automatically,
otherwise use ``encoding``.
If ``window`` is given then open files in that window, otherwise in an existing window.
- ``Editor.open_uri(uri, encoding=null, window=null)``: open file.
If ``encoding`` is null or "auto" then pick character encoding automatically,
otherwise use ``encoding``.
If ``window`` is given then open files in that window, otherwise in an existing window.
- ``Editor.reload(doc)``: reload document.
- ``Editor.save(doc)``: save document.
- ``Editor.save_as(doc, new_filename=null)``: save document as ``new_filename``.
If ``new_filename`` is not given then first ask user for new filename.
``Editor.close(doc)``: close document.
