MEDIT

August 2010

%!encoding: UTF-8

= NAME =

medit - text editor


= SYNOPSIS =

**medit** [//OPTION//]... [//FILES//]


= DESCRIPTION =

**medit** is a text editor.


= OPTIONS =

: **-n**, **--new-app**
run new instance of **medit**. By default **medit** opens //FILES//
(or creates a new document if none are given) in an existing instance
of application

: **-s**, **--use-session**[=//yes|no//]
load and save session. By default **medit** does it when **-n** is not used.
If this option is not given on command line then medit uses the corresponding
preferences setting.

: **--pid** //PID//
use existing instance with process id //PID//.

: **--app-name** //NAME//
use instance name //NAME//. If an instance with this name is already running,
then it will send files given on the command line to that instance and exit.

: **-e**, **--encoding** //ENCODING//
use provided character encoding to open the file

: **-l**, **--line** //LINE//
open file and position cursor on line //LINE//. Alternatively
line number may be specified with filename, e.g.
  medit foo.txt:12

: **-r**, **--reload**
automatically reload opened file if it was modified on disk by another program.

: **-w**, **--new-window**
open file in a new window.

: **-t**, **--new-tab**
open file in a new tab.

: **--log-file** //FILE//
write debug output into //FILE//. This option is only useful on Windows.

: **--log-window**
show debug output in a log window. This option is only useful on Windows.

: **--debug** //DOMAINS//
enable debug output for //DOMAINS// (if **medit** was compiled with
--enable-debug option).

: **--exec** //STRING//
execute python code in //STRING// in an existing instance.

: **--exec-file** //FILE//
execute python file //FILE// in an existing instance.

: **-h**, **--help**
show summary of options.

: **-v**, **--version**
show program version.

: //FILES//
list of files to open. Filenames may include line numbers after colon,
e.g. /tmp/file.txt:200. Trailing colon is ignored.


= ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES =

: MEDIT_PID
if set, it is used as --pid argument. When medit spawns a process (e.g. a DVI viewer) it sets
MEDIT_PID to its own process id, so the child process may in turn simply use 'medit filename'
to open a file (e.g. for inverse DVI search).


= CONTACT =

http://mooedit.sourceforge.net/contact.html


= AUTHOR =

Written and maintained by Yevgen Muntyan <emuntyan@sourceforge.net>


% = COPYRIGHT =
%
% 2004-2010 Yevgen Muntyan <emuntyan@sourceforge.net>
%
% medit is a free software.
