<!-- ========== prefs-file ========== -->
<section id="prefs-file">
<title>Preferences files</title>
<para>
&app; preferences are stored in <filename>$HOME/.config/&app;rc</filename> file.
It is an XML file which may be edited to set preferences which have not found
their place in the <interface>Preferences</interface> dialog.
</para>
<note>
&app; reads the preferences file on startup and writes it whenever <guibutton>OK</guibutton>
or <guibutton>Apply</guibutton> button is clicked in the <interface>Preferences</interface>
dialog. Therefore, if you modify the preferences file, your changes may be overwritten,
and they not take the effect until you restart &app;.
</note>
<para>
The following "hidden" settings are available.
</para>
<variablelist>
<varlistentry><term><userinput>Editor/window_title</userinput>:</term>
<listitem>
Format of the window title. It is a string which may contain format sequences:
percent sign followed by a character:
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<userinput>%a</userinput>: application name;
</listitem>
<listitem>
<userinput>%b</userinput>: current document basename;
</listitem>
<listitem>
<userinput>%f</userinput>: full path of the current document;
</listitem>
<listitem>
<userinput>%u</userinput>: URI of the current document;
</listitem>
<listitem>
<userinput>%s</userinput>: the status of the current document, e.g. "<literal> [modified]</literal>".
It is prefixed with space, so that "<literal>%b%s</literal>" will produce a nice string;
</listitem>
<listitem>
<userinput>%%</userinput>: the percent character.
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
Default value is "<literal>%a - %f%s</literal>" which produces something like
"<literal>&app; - /home/user/file [modified]</literal>".
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry><term><userinput>Editor/window_title_no_doc</userinput>:</term>
<listitem>
Same as <userinput>Editor/window_title</userinput>, used when no document is open. Default value
is "<literal>%a</literal>".
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry><term><userinput>Editor/tab_width</userinput>:</term>
<listitem>
Visual width of the Tab character, 8 by default.
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</section>
<!-- ========== prefs-file ========== -->
